Standard debugging compile settings:

gfortran -std=f95 -Wextra -Wall -pedantic -fcheck=all -Og -fbacktrace filename.f95 -o outputfilename


High performance compile options

gfortran -O3 filename.f95 -o outputfilename


-fbounds-check  !checks array bounds, is included in -fcheck=all
-static			!compiles all libraries into the executable
-O 				!basic optimization, still compiles fairly quickly
-O2				!more optimization, takes longer to compile
-O3				!maximize performance, long compile times
-O0				!fast compiling, very little optimization. This is the DEFAULT
-Os				!optimize for size
-Ofast 			!disregard strict standards compliance, results in very fast code that isn't necessarily standard
-Og				!optimize for debugging


Basic Usage

GNU Fortran is used to compile a source file, source.f90 to an object file, object.o or an executable.
Along the way it generates module description files for the modules it encounters. These files are named
nameofmodule.mod If a module is used, gfortran will read from these same files.

In order to compile the source file source.f90 one would run:

gfortran -c source.f90

The output file will automatically be named source.o This is an object file, which cannot be executed.

Once you have compiled some source files, you can link them together with the necessary libraries to
generate an executable. This is done as follows:

gfortran -o executable object1.o object2.o ...

where the the executable will be named executable and the objectN.o are object files, which may have
been created as above, or equally well by another compiler from sources in a different language. If -o
executable is omitted, the executable will be named a.out (on cygwin systems: a.exe . The executable may
then be executed like any other program.

One may also skip the separate compilation step, and enter a command such as:


gfortran -o executable source1.f90 source2.f90
which will compile the source files source1.f90 and source2.f90, link and generate the executable in one step.
You can also put object files on this command line, they will be automatically linked in during the link step.
